Draft OAuth Spec (#326)
bluesky-social/atproto-website: content/specs/auth.md

:::

OAuth is the primary mechanism in atproto for clients to make authorized requests to PDS instances. Most user-facing software is expected to use OAuth, including “front-end” clients like mobile apps, rich browser apps, or native desktop apps, as well as “back-end” clients like web services.

OAuth is a constantly evolving framework of standards and best practices, standardized by the IETF. atproto uses a specific "profile" of OAuth which mandates a particular combination of OAuth standards, as described in this document.

At a high level, we start with the "OAuth 2.1" ([`draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1/)) evolution of OAuth 2.0, which means:

- only the "authorization code" OAuth 2.0 grant type is supported, not "implicit" or other grant types
- mandatory Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE, [RFC 7636](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7636))
- security best practices ([`draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics) and [`draft-ietf-oauth-browser-based-apps`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-browser-based-apps)) are required

> Unlike a centralized app platform, in atproto there are many independent server implementations, so server discovery and client registration are automated using a combination of public auth server metadata and public client metadata. The `client_id` is a fully-qualified web URL pointing to the public client metadata (JSON document). There is no `client_secret` shared between servers and clients. When initiating a login with a handle or DID, an atproto-specific identity resolution step is required to discover the account’s PDS network location.

Author: The next paragraph discusses PDS vs entryway and RS vs AS. I'll add a sentence to clarify that PDS indicates what the AS is.

- **public clients** do not authenticate using a client signing key, either because they don’t have a server-side component (the client software all runs on end-user devices), or they simply chose not to implement it.

It is acceptable for a web service to act as a public client, and conversely it is possible for mobile apps and browser apps to coordinate with a token-mediating backend service and for the combination to form a confidential client. Mobile apps and browser apps can also adopt a "backend-for-frontend" (BFF) architecture with a web service backend acting as the OAuth client. This document will use the "public" vs "confidential" client terminology for clarity.

The environment a client runs in also impacts the type of redirect (callback) URLs it uses during the Authorization Flow:

- **web clients** include web services and browser apps. Redirect URLs are regular web URLs which open in a browser.
- **native clients** include some mobile and desktop native clients. Redirect URLs may use platform-specific app callback schemes to open in the app itself.

> Authorization Servers may maintain a set of "trusted" clients, identified by `client_id`. Because any client could use unverified client metadata to impersonate a better-known app or brand, Authorization Servers should not display such metadata to end users in the Authorization Interface by default. Trusted clients can have additional metadata shown, such as a readable name (`client_name`), project URI (`client_uri`, which may have a different domain/origin than `client_id`) and logo (`logo_uri`). See the "Security Considerations" section for more details.

Reviewer: I'm going to disagree on CORS here. You don't want the auth endpoint loading policies or TOSes, as you shouldn't be trusting them to render it. You want those links to open in new windows, which show the source URI, so an _observant user_ will see where they come from.

(Not that most people will of course, but some of us might)

> Authorization Servers may maintain a set of "trusted" clients, identified by `client_id`. Because any client could use unverified client metadata to impersonate a better-known app or brand, Authorization Servers should not display such metadata to end users in the Authorization Interface by default. Trusted clients can have additional metadata shown, such as a readable name (`client_name`), project URI (`client_uri`, which may have a different domain/origin than `client_id`) and logo (`logo_uri`). See the "Security Considerations" section for more details.

Reviewer 2: you are totally right, I meant CSP, not CORS, in order to load in an iframe. loading arbitrary html in an auth interface is a very bad idea indeed.

> Authorization Servers may maintain a set of "trusted" clients, identified by `client_id`. Because any client could use unverified client metadata to impersonate a better-known app or brand, Authorization Servers should not display such metadata to end users in the Authorization Interface by default. Trusted clients can have additional metadata shown, such as a readable name (`client_name`), project URI (`client_uri`, which may have a different domain/origin than `client_id`) and logo (`logo_uri`). See the "Security Considerations" section for more details.

Author: tracking here for follow-up: https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto-website/issues/339

Clients which are only using atproto OAuth for account authentication (without authorization to access PDS resources) should request minimal scopes (see “Scopes” section), but still need to implement most of the authorization flow. In particular, they must use the `sub` field in a token response to verify the account identity (this is an atproto-specific detail).

#### Client Metadata

:::note

> The client metadata standard is still a draft and may evolve over time. Our intention is to evolve and align with subsequent drafts and any final standard, while minimizing disruption and breakage with existing implementations.

Author: didn't update every location, but did update in a few crucial places to distinguish

:::

Clients must publish a "client metadata" JSON file on the public web. This will be fetched dynamically by Authorization Servers as part of the authorization request (PAR) and at other times during the session lifecycle. The response HTTP status must be 200 (not another 2xx or a redirect), with a JSON object body with the correct `Content-Type` (`application/json`).

> Authorization Servers need to fetch client metadata documents from the public web. They should use a hardened HTTP client for these requests (see "OAuth Security Considerations"). Servers may cache client metadata responses, optionally respecting HTTP caching headers (within limits). Minimum and maximum cache TTLs are not currently specified, but should be chosen to ensure that auth token requests predicated on stale confidential client authentication keys (`jwks` or `jwks_uris`) are rejected in a timely manner.

Author: hrm, "HTTP agent" is very jargon-y and unfamiliar to me.

> The following fields are relevant for all client types:

Author: I feel like that maybe interrupts the flow? I think including the link below (where it currently is) is good enough?

> The following fields are relevant for all client types:

Reviewer 2: When I first read this, it seemed to me that this paragraph needed an additional reference (as the previous paragraph does). Not necessarily to the IANA ([rfc7591](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7591) does not seem to be the best fit though). A link on one of the current word would be enough.

No strong opinion so feel free to resolve this comment ;-)

> - `client_id` (string, required): the `client_id`. Must exactly match the full URL used to fetch the client metadata file itself

Reviewer: Define exactly here. Case sensitive? Case sensitive path, but not on domain (because domains aren't case sensitive)? Do you want to normalize the URI before comparison?

Reviewer 2: OAuth does not mention normalization. If a `client_id` contains uppercase letters it is fine as long as when fetching that url (following any HTTP spec, eg. regarding the casing of the `Host`) returns the document with a `client_id` with the same casing as initially used.

It the the client's responsibility to provide a `client_id` that matches the metadata. The OAuth Authorization Server will not perform any transformation on the `client_id`.

> - `application_type` (string, optional): must be one of `web` or `native`, with `web` as the default if not specified

Author: added a note

- `grant_types` (array of strings, required): `authorization_code` must always be included. `refresh_token` is optional, but must be included if the client will make token refresh requests.
- `scope` (string, sub-strings space-separated, required): all scope values which *might* be requested by this client are declared here. The `atproto` scope is required, so must be included here. See “Scopes” section.
- `response_types` (array of strings, required): `code` must be included.

> - `redirect_uris` (array of strings, required): at least one redirect URI is required. See Authorization Request Fields section.

Reviewer 2: - Redirect uris should not contain the port number if it is the default port number for the protocol (`http://x:80`, `https://x:443` are not allowed)
- `http://127.0.0.1` and `http://[::1]` can only be used for `native` applications
- `http://127.0.0.1` and `http://[::1]` must not define any port component. URL matching must ignore the port component for those urls during auth flow.
- `https:` is required, except when the host is `127.0.0.1` or `[::1]`, in which case only `http:` is allowed.

Author: I don't want to duplicate these restrictions in two place. I added a reference that there are matching rules, and included them in the auth request field section (which already talks about `redirect_uri`).

- `token_endpoint_auth_method` (string, optional): confidential clients must set this to  `private_key_jwt`.

> - `token_endpoint_auth_signing_alg` (string, optional): if supplied, must be `ES256` (which is the default)

Reviewer: You should specify here that the "none" algorithm is not allowed. (Yes it's valid for JWTs, and there have been a bunch of CVEs around various libraries supporting it, and validating based upon it.

Not locking the algorithm down to a single algorithm would be preferable as this is a simple implementation of crypto agility. It allows clients in restricted environments (for example a FIPS compliant environment) to use or move to the algorithms their environment restricts them too.

It also allows you to add support for new algorithms as they get ratified and added to the spec in a spec compatible way.

> - `token_endpoint_auth_signing_alg` (string, optional): if supplied, must be `ES256` (which is the default)

Reviewer 2: Actually, the Authorization Server's  `token_endpoint_auth_signing_alg_values_supported` fields should be specified to *not* contain `none`, and that is must contain `ES256`.

Clients could define whatever they want in `token_endpoint_auth_signing_alg`, depending e.g. on the Auth Server they want to be able to interact with. Auth Servers should reject client metadata that contain a `token_endpoint_auth_signing_alg` that does not match their supported algos.

> - `token_endpoint_auth_signing_alg` (string, optional): if supplied, must be `ES256` (which is the default)

Author: updated the text. we will certainly support evolution of crypto algorithms over time. it is annoying that there is just a single value here, makes it a little harder to manage the evolution path.

- `dpop_bound_access_tokens` (boolean, required): DPoP is mandatory for all clients, so this must be present and `true`
- `jwks` (object with array of JWKs, optional): confidential clients must supply at least one public key in JWK format for use with JWT client authentication. Either this field or the `jwks_uri` field must be provided for confidential clients, but not both.
- `jwks_uri` (string, optional): URL pointing to a JWKS JSON object. See `jwks` above for details.

These fields are optional but recommended:

- `client_name` (string, optional): human-readable name of the client
- `client_uri` (string, optional): not to be confused with `client_id`, this is a homepage URL for the client. If provided, the `client_uri` must have the same hostname as `client_id`.

> - `logo_uri` (string, optional): HTTP URL to client logo

Reviewer: HTTPS URI surely?

> - `logo_uri` (string, optional): HTTP URL to client logo

Author: phrased it that "HTTPS is required over HTTP", meaning that `http://` isn't allowed and `https://` is, but leaves the door open to other transports and schemas (like `at://`).

I'll need to think about `data:` a bit more.

> - `logo_uri` (string, optional): HTTP URL to client logo

Author: tracking the `data:` bit here: https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto-website/issues/339

- `scope` (string, space-separated, multiple allowed, optional): the set of scopes which might be requested by the client. Default is `atproto`.

The other parameters in the virtual client metadata document will be:

- `client_id` (string): the exact `client_id` (URL) used to generate the virtual document
- `client_name` (string): a value chosen by the Authorization Server (e.g. "Loopback client")
- `response_types` (array of strings): must include `code`
- `grant_types` (array of strings): `authorization_code` and `refresh_token`
- `token_endpoint_auth_method`: `none`
- `application_type`: `native`
- `dpop_bound_access_tokens`: `true`

Note that this works as a public client, not a confidential client.

### Identity Authentication

As mentioned in the introduction, OAuth 2.0 generally provides only Authorization (`authz`), and additional standards like OpenID/OIDC are used for Authentication (`authn`). The atproto profile of OAuth requires authentication of account identity and supports the use case of simple identity authentication without additional resource access authorization.

> In atproto, account identity is anchored in the account DID, which is the permanent, globally unique, publicly resolvable identifier for the account. The DID resolves to a DID document which indicates the current PDS host location for the account. That PDS (combined with an optional entryway) is the authorization authority and the OAuth Authorization Server for the account. When speaking to any Authorization Server, it is critical (mandatory) for clients to confirm that it is actually the authoritative server for the account in question, which means independently resolving the account identity (by DID) and confirming that the Authorization Server matches. It is also critical (mandatory) to confirm at the end of an authorization flow that the Authorization Server actually granted tokens for the expected account.

Reviewer: Use RFC language here.

> When speaking to any Authorization Server clients _must_ confirm that the authorization server is the authoritative for the account being authorized. Clients _must_ do this by resolving the account identity to a DID, resolving the PDS for the DID and finally resolving the authorisation server for that PDS. (See appendix _<whatever>_ for further details)

This however I disagree with

> It is also critical (mandatory) to confirm at the end of an authorization flow that the Authorization Server actually granted tokens for the expected account.

It is not the client's job to validate tokens given to it by an authorization server. That is the job of the server who requires the tokens. The oauth spec does not specify a token format (although [rfc9068](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9068) does, but it's in draft, and no-one appears to have picked it up again since the author passed away). 

It's spec valid to get a guid back, or a reference token instead of JWTs. Clients should be handling tokens as opaque and just passing them onto the api server. (Although I realise in practice people do look at expiry dates etc. when it's a JWT, but what happens then if you switch to encrypted JWTS? They're encrypted for the server, and the client can't do anything with them at all)

> In atproto, account identity is anchored in the account DID, which is the permanent, globally unique, publicly resolvable identifier for the account. The DID resolves to a DID document which indicates the current PDS host location for the account. That PDS (combined with an optional entryway) is the authorization authority and the OAuth Authorization Server for the account. When speaking to any Authorization Server, it is critical (mandatory) for clients to confirm that it is actually the authoritative server for the account in question, which means independently resolving the account identity (by DID) and confirming that the Authorization Server matches. It is also critical (mandatory) to confirm at the end of an authorization flow that the Authorization Server actually granted tokens for the expected account.

Author: I'm sure we'll do a whole pass over these specs to use RFC 2119 terminology (maybe when these actually get written to submit as I-D), but that hasn't happened yet.

I think the end of this paragraph was confusing so I updated it. We aren't asking clients to inspect the tokens in any way (they are opaque to the client). What they need to inspect is the `sub` field of the token response body (which includes the tokens themselves in separate fields).

When starting with an account identifier, the client must resolve the atproto identity to a DID document. If starting with a handle, it is critical (mandatory) to bidirectionally verify the handle by checking that the DID document claims the handle (see atproto Handle specification). All handle resolution techniques and all atproto-blessed DID methods must be supported to ensure interoperability with all accounts.

In some client environments, it may be difficult to resolve all identity types. For example, handle resolution may involve DNS TXT queries, which are not directly supported from browser apps. Client implementations might use alternative techniques (such as DNS-over-HTTP) or could make use of a supporting web service to resolve identities.

Because authorization flows are security-critical, any caching of identity resolution should choose cache lifetimes carefully. Cache lifetimes of less than 10 minutes are recommended for auth flows specifically.

> The resolved DID should be bound to the overall auth session and should be used as the primary account identifier within client app code. Handles (when verified) are acceptable to display in user interfaces, but may change over time and need to be re-verified periodically. When passing an account identifier through to the Authorization Server as part of the Authorization Request in the `login_field`, it is recommended to use the exact account identifier supplied by the user (handle or DID) to ensure any sign-in flow is consistent (users might not recognize their own account DID).

Author: for the auth interface login field? that seems like a good practice, but not really required, right? I think if somebody pastes a DID in to the initial field it is nice to have that used all the way through, instead of re-writing to a handle. not against the AS making the login smoother, but seems out of scope for this document.

> The resolved DID should be bound to the overall auth session and should be used as the primary account identifier within client app code. Handles (when verified) are acceptable to display in user interfaces, but may change over time and need to be re-verified periodically. When passing an account identifier through to the Authorization Server as part of the Authorization Request in the `login_field`, it is recommended to use the exact account identifier supplied by the user (handle or DID) to ensure any sign-in flow is consistent (users might not recognize their own account DID).

Author: moved here to track: https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto-website/issues/339

> At the end of the auth flow, when the client does an initial token fetch, the Authorization Server must return the account DID in the `sub` field of the JSON response body. If the entire auth flow started with an account identifier, it is critical for the client to verify that this DID matches the expected DID bound to the session earlier; the linkage from account to Authorization Server will already have been verified in this situation.

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention that this mechanism is made possible though the "state" auth param

Reviewer: RFC language here,

a client MUST verify instead of "it is critical for a client to"

Author: @matthieusieben that feels more like an implementation guide level of "how to do it" guidance?

Reviewer 2: I believe that pointing at the `state` param could clarify, for people used to work with OIDC nonces, that in our case, the entire "identifier" for the auth request is the `state` and nothing else.

Maybe you are right that this is more of an implementation guide level but things gets so confusing when you work with oauth that I believe it might be worth making things as clear as possible as soon as possible.

Author: tracking here: https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto-website/issues/339

> If the auth flow instead starts with a server (hostname or URL), the client will first attempt to fetch Resource Server metadata (and resolve to Authorization Server if found) and then attempt to fetch Authorization Server metadata. See “Authorization Server” section for server metadata fetching. If either is successful, the client will end up with an identified Authorization Server. The Authorization Request and flow will proceed without a `login_hint` or account identifier being bound to the session, but the Authorization Server `issuer` will be bound to the session.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the auth flow instead starts with a server (hostname or URL), the client will first attempt to fetch Resource Server metadata (and resolve to Authorization Server if found) and then attempt to fetch Authorization Server metadata. See “Authorization Server” section for server metadata fetching. If either is successful, the client will end up with an identified Authorization Server. The Authorization Request flow will proceed without a `login_hint` or account identifier being bound to the session, but the Authorization Server `issuer` will be bound to the session.
```

After the auth flow continues and an initial token request succeeds, the client will parse the account identifier from the `sub` field in the token response. At this point, the client still cannot trust that it has actually authenticated the indicated account. It is critical for the client to resolve the identity (DID document), extract the declared PDS host, and confirm that the PDS (Resource Server) resolves to the Authorization Server bound to the session by fetching the Resource Server metadata.

> To reiterate, it is critical for all clients - including those only interested in atproto Identity Authentication - to go through the entire Authorization flow and to verify that the account identifier (DID) in the `sub` field of the token response is consistent with the Authorization Server hostname/origin (`issuer`).

Reviewer 2: It is for authN that the verification is really critical. If the `sub` is not used at all (besides for determing the PDS URL) then there is no real risk as it will be the responsibility of the PDS to reject the token.

```suggestion
To reiterate, it is critical for all clients - including those only interested in atproto Authorization - to go through the entire Authorization flow and to verify that the account identifier (DID) in the `sub` field of the token response is consistent with the Authorization Server hostname/origin (`issuer`).
```

or

```suggestion
To reiterate, it is critical for all clients - especially those only interested in atproto Identity Authentication - to go through the entire Authorization flow and to verify that the account identifier (DID) in the `sub` field of the token response is consistent with the Authorization Server hostname/origin (`issuer`).
```

Reviewer: Again, a client MUST etc.

And if this is a MUST then you don't need to specify who its especially a MUST for, it's either MUST or it's not. Starting to carve out a special interest even though everyone should do it muddies the waters.

Author: I added this section because it would be tempting for folks to just skip it. Everything will "just work" without this check in most cases. These specs are not (yet) IETF RFCs and don't (yet) have the same cultural expectations and editing norms.

I think changing the language to "especially" makes it feel like maybe the other kind of client can skip it, in a way that "including" doesn't.

Reviewer 2: It is just that the current wording seem to indicate that if a client is "only interested in Identity Authentication", it might be less important for them to check the sub. But that is not the case at all!

If we are going to keep some wording that indicates that one use case might be less critical to the verification of the sub, it should probably emphasis on the importance for the right use case.

```suggestion
To reiterate, it is critical for all clients - including those not interested in atproto Identity Authentication - to go through the entire Authorization flow and to verify that the account identifier (DID) in the `sub` field of the token response is consistent with the Authorization Server hostname/origin (`issuer`).
```

Author: tracking here: https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto-website/issues/339

> 

Reviewer 2: This section should also mention that the `issuer` must also be checked against the Authorization Server origin:
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1-11#section-7.13.1

Reviewer 2: Also, this RFC must be implemented (as per OAuth 2.1):

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9207.html

### Authorization Scopes

OAuth scopes allow more granular control over the resources and actions a client is granted access to.

The special `atproto` scope is required for all atproto OAuth sessions. The semantics are somewhat similar to the `openid` scope: inclusion of it confirms that the client is using the atproto profile of OAuth and will comply with all the requirements laid out in this specification. No access to any atproto-specific PDS resources will be granted without this scope included.

Authorization Servers may support other profiles of OAuth if client does not include the `atproto` scope. For example, an Authorization Server might function as both an atproto PDS/entryway, and support other protocols/standards at the same time.

> Use of the atproto OAuth profile, as indicated by the `atproto` scope, means that the Authorization Server will return the atproto account DID as an account identifier in the `sub` field of token requests. A client may include only the `atproto` scope if they only need account authentication - for example a “Login with atproto” use case. Unlike OpenID, profile metadata in atproto is generally public, so an additional authorization scope for fetching profile metadata is not needed.

Reviewer 2: We might mention that AS must return `atproto` in their `scopes_supported`, allowing clients to detect support of the atproto profile before initiating any oauth flow.

> In OAuth 2.0, Authorization Servers may always return the granted scopes in auth request responses and token responses, but are only required to do so if the scope is different from what the client requested. In the atproto OAuth profile, servers must always return the granted scopes.

Reviewer 2: Should we add here:

> Clients should reject token responses if they don't contain a `scope` field, or if the `scope` field does not contain `atproto`.

Reviewer: nit: "may always" -> can. And then "However in atproto Oauth profile services must" (drop always here, it's redundant"

Author: Updated. @matthieusieben do you think this is a "should" or a "must" (for clients to do these rejections)?

Reviewer 2: I think that @blowdart is right in his comment:

> nit: "may always" -> can. And then "However in atproto Oauth profile services must" (drop always here, it's redundant"

    - write (create/update/delete) any repository record type
    - upload blobs (media files)
    - read and write any personal preferences
    - API endpoints and service proxying for most Lexicon endpoints, to any service provider (identified by DID)
    - ability to generate service auth tokens for the specific API endpoints the client has access to
    - no account management actions: change handle, change email, delete or deactivate account, migrate account
    - no access to DMs (the `chat.bsky.*` Lexicons), specifically
- `transition:chat.bsky`: equivalent to adding the “DM Access” toggle for “App Passwords”
    - API endpoints and service proxying for the `chat.bsky` Lexicons specifically
    - ability to generate service auth tokens for the `chat.bsky` Lexicons
    - this scope depends on and does not function without the  `transition:generic` scope

### Authorization Requests

This section details standards and requirements specific to Authorization Requests.

PKCE and PAR are required for all client types and Authorization Servers. Confidential clients authenticate themselves using JWT client assertions.

#### Request Fields

> A summary of fields relevant to authorization requests with the atproto OAuth profile:

Reviewer: Specific case sensitivity for values here. Presumably they're all case sensitive, but best to call it out.

Author: Can we refer to / defer to an upstream OAuth RFC on this? there are probably many such details we aren't re-specifying in this document. would like to clarify if we are adding an atproto-specific requirement or not.

- `scope` (string with space-separated values, required): must be a subset of the scopes declared in client metadata. Must include `atproto`. See "Scopes" section.
- `client_assertion_type` (string, optional): used by confidential clients to describe the client authentication mechanism. See “Confidential Client” section.
- `client_assertion` (string, optional): only used for confidential clients, for client authentication. See "Confidential Client" section.
- `login_hint` (string, optional): account identifier to be used for login. See "Authorization Interface" section.

The `client_secret` value, used in many other OAuth profiles, should not be included.

The `state` parameter in client authorization requests is mandatory. Clients should use randomly-generated tokens for this parameter and not have collisions or reuse tokens across any combination of device, account, or session. Authorization Servers should reject duplicate state parameters, but are not currently required to track state values across accounts or sessions.

> For web clients, the `redirect_uri` is a HTTPS URL which will be redirected in the browser to return users to the application at the end of the Authorization flow. The `redirect_uri` must match one of the URIs declared in the client metadata and the Authorization Server must verify this condition. There is a special exception for the [localhost](http://localhost) development workflow to use `http://`, as described in the "Localhost Client Development" section. For native clients, the `redirect_uri` may use a custom URI scheme to have the operating system redirect the user back to the app, instead of a web browser. The custom scheme must match the `client_id` hostname in reverse-domain order. The URI scheme must be followed by a single colon (`:`) then a single forward slash (`/`) and then a URI path component. For example, an app with `client_id`  [`https://app.example.com/client-metadata.json`](https://app.example.com/client-metadata.json) could have a `redirect_uri` of `com.example.app:/callback`.

Reviewer 2: > to use `http://`

==>

> to use `http://127.0.0.1` or `http://[::1]`

```suggestion
For web clients, the `redirect_uri` is a HTTPS URL which will be redirected in the browser to return users to the application at the end of the Authorization flow. The `redirect_uri` must match one of the URIs declared in the client metadata and the Authorization Server must verify this condition. There is a special exception for the [localhost](http://localhost) development workflow to use `http://127.0.0.1` or `http://[::1]`, as described in the "Localhost Client Development" section. For native clients, the `redirect_uri` may use a custom URI scheme to have the operating system redirect the user back to the app, instead of a web browser. The custom scheme must match the `client_id` hostname in reverse-domain order. The URI scheme must be followed by a single colon (`:`) then a single forward slash (`/`) and then a URI path component. For example, an app with `client_id`  [`https://app.example.com/client-metadata.json`](https://app.example.com/client-metadata.json) could have a `redirect_uri` of `com.example.app:/callback`.
```

Author: added a note that any port and path can be used, otherwise it reads like the URL must be exactly `http://127.0.0.1` or `http://[::1]`

> For web clients, the `redirect_uri` is a HTTPS URL which will be redirected in the browser to return users to the application at the end of the Authorization flow. The `redirect_uri` must match one of the URIs declared in the client metadata and the Authorization Server must verify this condition. There is a special exception for the [localhost](http://localhost) development workflow to use `http://`, as described in the "Localhost Client Development" section. For native clients, the `redirect_uri` may use a custom URI scheme to have the operating system redirect the user back to the app, instead of a web browser. The custom scheme must match the `client_id` hostname in reverse-domain order. The URI scheme must be followed by a single colon (`:`) then a single forward slash (`/`) and then a URI path component. For example, an app with `client_id`  [`https://app.example.com/client-metadata.json`](https://app.example.com/client-metadata.json) could have a `redirect_uri` of `com.example.app:/callback`.

Reviewer 2: The redirect URI *must* be defined, and excaclty match, one of the redirect uri defined in the metadata document.

Exact matching is required, except for `http://127.0.0.1` and `http://[::1]` redirect uris (used by `native` apps) where the port number must not be specified in the document metadata, and can be any value (excluded from the matching) during the auth request.

Author: I think the text already covers the first part?

For the second, I don't want to re-describe all the matching rules here, I think it should stick in the localhost section. Added some text there.

:::note
PAR is a relatively new and less-supported standard, and the requirement to use PAR may be relaxed if it is found to be too onerous a requirement for client implementations. In that case, Authorization Servers would be required to support both PAR and non-PAR requests with PAR being optional for clients.
:::

#### Confidential Client Authentication

Confidential clients authenticate themselves during the Authorization Request using a JWT client assertion. Authorization Servers may grant confidential clients longer token/session lifetimes. See "Tokens" section for more context.

The client assertion type to use is `urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-bearer`, as described in "JSON Web Token (JWT) Profile for OAuth 2.0 Client Authentication and Authorization Grants" ([RFC 7523](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7523)). Clients and Authorization Servers must support the `ES256` cryptographic system. The set of recommended systems/algorithms is expected to evolve over time.

Additional requirements:

> - confidential clients publish one or more client authentication keys (public key) in the client metadata. This can be either direct JWK format as JSON in the `jwks` field, or as a separate JWKS JSON object on the web linked by a `jwks_uri` URL. A `jwks_uri` URL must be a valid fully qualified URL with `https://` scheme.

Reviewer: NIT: _must_ publish

Author: felt a bit weird to phrase this as a "must", as this is basically what makes a client a confidential client? "confidential clients are those which publish ..."

Reviewer 2: What makes a client confidential is that fact that it uses `urn:ietf:params:oauth:client-assertion-type:jwt-bearer` during auth requests.

A client could declare a jwks/jwks_uri and decide not to use it for some auth request.

Some guidelines and requirements:

- access token lifetimes should be less than 30 minutes in all situations. If the server cannot revoke individual access tokens then the maximum is 15 minutes, and 5 minutes is recommended.
- for “untrusted” public clients, overall session lifetime should be limited to 7 days, and the lifetime of individual refresh tokens should be limited to 24 hours
- for confidential clients, the overall session lifetime may be unlimited. Individual refresh tokens should have a lifetime limited to 180 days
- confidential clients must use the same client authentication key and assertion method for refresh token requests that they did for the initial authentication request

### Demonstrating Proof of Possession (DPoP)

The atproto OAuth profile mandates use of DPoP for all client types when making auth token requests to the Authorization Server and when making authorized requests to the Resource Server. See [RFC 9449](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9449) for details.

Clients must initiate DPoP in the initial authorization request (PAR).

> Server-provided DPoP nonces are mandatory. The Resource Server and Authorization Server may share nonces (especially if they are the same server) or they may have separate nonces. Clients should track the DPoP nonce per account session and per server. Servers must rotate nonces periodically, with a maximum lifetime of 5 minutes. Servers may use the same nonce across all client sessions and across multiple requests at any point in time. Servers should accept recently-stale (old) nonces to make rotation smoother for clients with multiple concurrent request in-flight. Clients should be resilient to unexpected nonce updates in the form of HTTP 400 errors and should retry those failed requests.

Reviewer 2: We should add:

> Clients should reject dpop verification responses that do not include a nonce header.

- `response_types_supported` (array of strings, required): must include `code`
- `grant_types_supported` (array of strings, required): must include `authorization_code` and `refresh_token` (refresh tokens must be supported)
- `code_challenge_methods_supported` (array of strings, required): must include `S256` (see "PKCE" section)
- `token_endpoint_auth_methods_supported` (array of strings, required): must include both `none` (public clients) and `private_key_jwt` (confidential clients)
- `token_endpoint_auth_signing_alg_values_supported` (array of strings, required); must include `ES256`
- `scopes_supported` (space-separated string, required): must include `atproto`. If supporting the transitional grants, they should be included here as well. See "Scopes" section.
- `authorization_response_iss_parameter_supported` (boolean): must be `true`
- `require_pushed_authorization_requests` (boolean): must be `true`. See "PAR" section.
- `pushed_authorization_request_endpoint` (string, required): must be the PAR endpoint URL. See "PAR" section.
- `dpop_signing_alg_values_supported` (array of strings, required): must include `ES256`. See "DPoP" section.

> - `require_request_uri_registration` (boolean, optional): default is `true`; does not need to be set explicitly, but must not be `false`

Reviewer: > default is `true`; does not need to be set explicitly, but must not be `false`

change

If set the value must be 'true'

- `client_id_metadata_document_supported` (boolean, required): must be `true`. See "Client Metadata" section.

#### Authorization Interface

The Authorization Server (PDS/entryway) must implement a web interface for users to authenticate with the server, approve (or reject) Authorization Requests from clients, and manage active sessions. This is called the “Authorization Interface”.

Server implementations can chose their own technology for user authentication and account recovery: secure cookies, email, various two-factor authentication, passkeys, external identity providers (including upstream OpenID/OIDC), etc. Servers may also support multiple concurrent auth sessions with users.

> When a client redirects to the Authorization Server’s authorization URL (the declared `authorization_endpoint`), the server first needs to authenticate the user. If there is no active auth session, the user may be prompted to log in. If a `login_hint` was provided in the Authorization Request, that can be used to pre-populate the login form. If there are multiple active auth sessions, the user could be prompted to select one from a list, or the `login_hint` could be used to auto-select. If there is a single active session, the interface can move to the approval view, possibly with the option to login as a different account.

Author: Added as a "should" for the server, describing that the whole flow will fail if it doesn't happen. we don't actually enforce this today and don't want to include so many "must" that we don't do, and that PDS implementation might (somewhat reasonably) skip; it is on the client to validate and fail in the end.

The authorization approval prompt should identify the client app and describe the scope of authorization that has been requested.

The amount of client metadata that should be displayed may depend on whether the client is “trusted” by the Authorization Server; see the “Client” and “Security Concerns” sections. The full `client_id` URL should be displayed by default.

See the “Scopes” section for a description of scope options.

If a client is a confidential client and the user has already approved the same scopes for the same client in the past, the Authorization Server may allow “silent sign-in” by auto-approving the request. Authorization Servers can set their own policies for this flow: it may require explicit user configuration, or the client may be required to be “trusted”.

Authorization Servers should separately implement a web interface which allows authenticated users to view active OAuth sessions and delete them.

### Summary of Authorization Flow

This is a high-level description of what an atproto OAuth authorization flow looks like. It assumes the user already has an atproto account.

> The client starts by asking for the user’s account identifier (handle or DID), or for a PDS/entryway hostname. See “Identity Authentication” section for details.

Reviewer: Unless you're planning to translate the wording into every language I wouldn't try to standardise it.

> The client starts by asking for the user’s account identifier (handle or DID), or for a PDS/entryway hostname. See “Identity Authentication” section for details.

Author: I think this guidance should go in the client implementation guide, not in this spec document.

> The client starts by asking for the user’s account identifier (handle or DID), or for a PDS/entryway hostname. See “Identity Authentication” section for details.

Reviewer 2: the client implementation guide feels like a less authoritative document than this one, but I 'm fine with that solution 👍

> The client starts by asking for the user’s account identifier (handle or DID), or for a PDS/entryway hostname. See “Identity Authentication” section for details.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should have two client implementation guides: "the basics" and "the hard way".

For an account identifier, the client resolves the identity to a DID document, extracts the declared PDS URL, then fetches the Resource Server and Authorization Server locations. If starting with a server hostname, the client resolves that hostname to an Authorization Server. In either case, Authorization Server metadata is fetched and verified against requirements for atproto OAuth (see “Authorization Server” section).

The client next makes a Pushed Authorization Request via HTTP POST request. See “Authorization Request” section; some notable details include:

- a randomly generated `state` token is required, and will be used to reference this authorization request with the subsequent response callback
- PKCE is required, so a secret value is generated and stored, and a derived challenge is included in the request

> - `scope` values are requested here, and must include `atproto`

Author: I think clients should affirmatively include `atproto` at every step.

- for confidential clients, a `client_assertion` is included, with type `jwt-bearer`, signed using the secret client authentication key
- the client generates a new DPoP key for the user/session and uses it starting with the PAR request
- if the auth flow started with an account identifier, the client should pass that starting identifier via the `login_hint` field
- atproto uses PAR, so the request will be sent as an HTTP POST request to the Authorization Server

The Authorization Server will receive the PAR request and use the `client_id` URL to resolve the client metadata document. The server validates the request and client metadata, then stores information about the session, including binding a DPoP key to the session. The server returns a `request_uri` token to the client, including a DPoP nonce via HTTP header.

> The client receives the `request_uri` token and prepares to redirect the user. The client must first persist information about the session to some form of storage. This might be a database (for a web service backend) or web platform storage like IndexedDB (for a browser app). The client then redirects the user via browser to the Authorization Server’s auth endpoint, including the `request_uri` as a URL parameter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The client receives the `request_uri` and prepares to redirect the user. The client must first persist information about the session to some form of storage. This might be a database (for a web service backend) or web platform storage like IndexedDB (for a browser app). The client then redirects the user via browser to the Authorization Server’s auth endpoint, including the `request_uri` as a URL parameter.
```

Reviewer 2: We should add a note here (or in the security section) about how to properly create & store DPoP keys in the browser (by storing a non-exportable keypair in the IndexedDB).

Reviewer: I'd be wary of putting an implementation detail in a specification. A sample implementation in an appendix sure, but in the spec then limits the spec, and other, newer and safer approachess may come along.

Author: I think this kind of implementation guidance should go in the guide, not in the spec

> The client receives the `request_uri` token and prepares to redirect the user. The client must first persist information about the session to some form of storage. This might be a database (for a web service backend) or web platform storage like IndexedDB (for a browser app). The client then redirects the user via browser to the Authorization Server’s auth endpoint, including the `request_uri` as a URL parameter.

Reviewer: Could just simplify to "The client should securely persist session information". However, what's the intent here? What information?

The Authorization Server uses the `request_uri` to look up the earlier Authorization Request parameters, authenticates the user (which might include sign-in or account selection), and prompts the user with the Authorization Interface. The user might refine any granular requested scopes, then approves or rejects the request. The Authorization Server redirects the user back to the `redirect_uri`, which might be a web callback URL (for web clients), or a native app URI.

> The client uses URL query parameters (`state` and `iss`) to look up and verify session information and stores the authorization `code`. Using the `code`, the client then makes an initial token request to the Authorization Server’s token endpoint. The client completes the PKCE flow by including the earlier value in the `code_verifier` field. Confidential clients need to include a client assertion JWT in the token request; see the "Confidential Client" section. The Authorization Server validates the request and returns a set of tokens, as well as a `sub` field indicating the account identifier (DID) for this session.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The client uses URL query parameters (`state` and `iss`) to look up and verify session information. Using the `code` query parameter, the client then makes an initial token request to the Authorization Server’s token endpoint. The client completes the PKCE flow by including the earlier value in the `code_verifier` field. Confidential clients need to include a client assertion JWT in the token request; see the "Confidential Client" section. The Authorization Server validates the request and returns a set of tokens, as well as a `sub` field indicating the account identifier (DID) for this session, and the `scope` that is covered by the issued access token.
```

> The client uses URL query parameters (`state` and `iss`) to look up and verify session information and stores the authorization `code`. Using the `code`, the client then makes an initial token request to the Authorization Server’s token endpoint. The client completes the PKCE flow by including the earlier value in the `code_verifier` field. Confidential clients need to include a client assertion JWT in the token request; see the "Confidential Client" section. The Authorization Server validates the request and returns a set of tokens, as well as a `sub` field indicating the account identifier (DID) for this session.

Reviewer: NIT: RFC language = The client must use the state and iss paraemeters ....

Author: This is implementation guidance (which should mostly be in the implementation guide... but I thought it was really hard to understand without this bit of context), so isn't a "must".

> At this point it is critical (mandatory) for all clients to verify that the account identified by the `sub` field is consistent with the Authorization Server `issuer`, either by validating against the originally-supplied account DID, or by resolving the accounts DID to confirm the PDS is consistent with the Authorization Server. See “Identity Authentication” section. The Authorization always returns the scopes approved for the session in the `scopes` field (even if they are the same as the request, as an atproto OAuth profile requirement), which may reflect partial authorization by the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point it is critical (mandatory) for all clients to verify that the account identified by the `sub` field is consistent with the Authorization Server `issuer` present in the `iss` query string, either by validating against the originally-supplied account DID, or by resolving the accounts DID to confirm the PDS is consistent with the Authorization Server. See “Identity Authentication” section. The Authorization always returns the scopes approved for the session in the `scopes` field (even if they are the same as the request, as an atproto OAuth profile requirement), which may reflect partial authorization by the user. Clients must reject any token response not containing `atproto` in the returned scope.
```

> At this point it is critical (mandatory) for all clients to verify that the account identified by the `sub` field is consistent with the Authorization Server `issuer`, either by validating against the originally-supplied account DID, or by resolving the accounts DID to confirm the PDS is consistent with the Authorization Server. See “Identity Authentication” section. The Authorization always returns the scopes approved for the session in the `scopes` field (even if they are the same as the request, as an atproto OAuth profile requirement), which may reflect partial authorization by the user.

Reviewer: NIT: RFC language - The client must verify the account information identified by the sub field ...

But again I point out that tokens are not for clients, they should be treated as opaque blobs. It's on the relying party to validate, not the client.

Author: See above: the `sub` field is not in any token, it is the token response, which is a regular JSON object containing the tokens and additional fields (including `sub`)

DPoP (with mandatory nonces) is required to bind auth tokens to specific client software instances (eg, end devices or browser sessions). Pushed Authentication Requests (PAR) are used to streamline the authorization request flow. “Confidential” clients use JWTs signed with a secret key to authenticate the client software to Authorization Servers when making authorization requests.

Automated client registration using client metadata is one of the more novel aspect of OAuth in atproto. As of August 2024, client metadata is still an Internet Draft ([`draft-parecki-oauth-client-id-metadata-document`](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-parecki-oauth-client-id-metadata-document/)); it should not be confused with the existing “Dynamic Client Registration” standard ([RFC 7591](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7591)). We are hopeful other open protocols will adopt similar automated registration flows in the future, but there may not be general OAuth ecosystem support for some time.

> OAuth 2.0 is traditionally an authorization (`authz`) system, not an authentication (`authn`) system, meaning that it is not always a solution for pure account authentication use cases, such as “Signup/Login with XYZ” identity integrations. OpenID Connect (OIDC), which build on top of OAuth 2.0, is usually the recommended standard for identity authentication. The atproto profile of OAuth includes a (mandatory) mechanism for account authentication during the authorization flow, and is currently recommended over OIDC for atproto identity authentication use cases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
OAuth 2.0 is traditionally an authorization (`authz`) system, not an authentication (`authn`) system, meaning that it is not always a solution for pure account authentication use cases, such as “Signup/Login with XYZ” identity integrations. OpenID Connect (OIDC), which build on top of OAuth 2.0, is usually the recommended standard for identity authentication. The atproto profile of OAuth includes a (mandatory) mechanism for account authentication during the authorization flow and is currently recommended over OIDC for atproto identity authentication use cases.
```

Clients must publish a "client metadata" JSON file on the public web. This will be fetched dynamically by Authorization Servers as part of the authorization request (PAR) and at other times during the session lifecycle. The response HTTP status must be 200 (not another 2xx or a redirect), with a JSON object body with the correct `Content-Type` (`application/json`).

Authorization Servers need to fetch client metadata documents from the public web. They should use a hardened HTTP client for these requests (see Security Considerations). Servers may cache client metadata responses, optionally respecting HTTP caching headers (within limits). Minimum and maximum cache TTLs are not currently specified, but should be chosen to ensure that auth token requests predicated on stale confidential client authentication keys (`jwks` or `jwks_uris`) are rejected in a timely manner.

The following fields are relevant for all client types:

- `client_id` (string, required): the `client_id`. Must exactly match the full URL used to fetch the client metadata file itself

> - `application_type` (string, optional): must be one of `web` or `native`, with `web` the default if not specified

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `application_type` (string, optional): must be one of `web` or `native`, with `web` as the default if not specified
```

- `dpop_bound_access_tokens` (boolean, required): DPoP is mandatory for all clients, so this must be present and `true`
- `jwks` (object with array of JWKs, optional): confidential clients must supply at least one public key in JWK format for use with JWT client authentication. Either this field or the `jwks_uri` field must be provided for confidential clients, but not both.
- `jwks_uri` (string, optional): URL pointing to a JWKS JSON object. See `jwks` above for details.

These fields are optional but recommended:

- `client_name` (string, optional): human-readable name of the client
- `client_uri` (string, optional): not to be confused with `client_id`, this is a homepage URL for the client. If provided, the `client_uri` must have the same hostname as `client_id`.
- `logo_uri` (string, optional): HTTP URL to client logo
- `tos_uri` (string, optional): HTTP URL to human-readable terms of service (ToS) for the client
- `policy_uri` (string, optional): HTTP URL to human-readable privacy policy for the client

See Security Considerations below about when  `client_name`, `client_uri`, and `logo_uri` will or will not be displayed to end users.

> Additional optional client metadata fields are enumerated with [IANA](https://www.iana.org/assignments/oauth-parameters/oauth-parameters.xhtml#client-metadata) (note that these are shared with the "Dynamic Client Registration" standard, which is not used directly by the atproto OAuth profile).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additional optional client metadata fields are enumerated with [IANA](https://www.iana.org/assignments/oauth-parameters/oauth-parameters.xhtml#client-metadata). Note that these are shared with the "Dynamic Client Registration" standard, which is not used directly by the atproto OAuth profile.
```

#### Localhost Client Development

When working on client software, it may be difficult for developers to publish in-progress client metadata at a public URL so that authorization servers can access it. This may even be true for development environments using a containerized Authorization Server and local DNS, because of SSRF protections against local IP ranges.

> To make development workflows easier, a special exception is made for clients with `client_id` having origin `http://localhost` (with no port number specified). Authorization Servers are encouraged to support this exception, including in production environments, but it is optional.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To make development workflows easier, a special exception is made for clients with `client_id` having origin `http://localhost` (with no port number specified). Authorization Servers are encouraged to support this exception - including in production environments - but it is optional.
```

> In a localhost `client_id` scenario, the Authorization Server should verify that the scheme is `http`, and that the hostname is exactly `localhost` with no port specified. IP addresses (`127.0.0.1`, etc) are not supported. The path parameter must be empty (`/`). Some parameters can or must be provided via query parameter in the `client_id` URL (with appropriate urlencoding):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In a localhost `client_id` scenario, the Authorization Server should verify that the scheme is `http`, and that the hostname is exactly `localhost` with no port specified. IP addresses (`127.0.0.1`, etc) are not supported. The path parameter must be empty (`/`). Some parameters can be while others must be provided via query parameter in the `client_id` URL (with appropriate urlencoding):
```

Reviewer 3: Is this right? Or are they all supposed to be provided via query param?

Author: re-wrote this bit

- `scope` (string, space-separated, multiple allowed, optional): default is `atproto`

The other parameters in the virtual client metadata document will be:

- `client_id` (string): the exact `client_id` (URL) used to generate the virtual document
- `client_name` (string): a value chosen by the Authorization Server (e.g. "Loopback client")
- `response_types` (array of strings): includes `code`
- `grant_types` (array of strings): `authorization_code` and `refresh_token`
- `token_endpoint_auth_method`: `none`
- `application_type`: `native`
- `dpop_bound_access_tokens`: `true`

Note that this works as a public client, not a confidential client.

### Identity Authentication

As mentioned in the introduction, OAuth 2.0 generally provides only Authorization (`authz`), and additional standards like OpenID/OIDC are used for Authentication (`authn`). The atproto profile of OAuth requires authentication of account identity and supports the use case of simple identity authentication without additional resource access authorization.

> In atproto, account identity is anchored in the account DID, which is the permanent, globally unique, publicly resolvable identifier for the account. The DID resolves to a DID document which indicates the current PDS host location for the account. That PDS (combined with an optional entryway) is the authorization authority for the account, and is the OAuth Authorization Server for that account. When speaking to any Authorization Server, it is critical (mandatory) for clients to confirm that it is actually the authoritative server for the account in question, which means independently resolving the account identity (by DID) and confirming that the Authorization Server matches. It is also critical (mandatory) to confirm at the end of an authorization flow that the Authorization Server actually granted tokens for the expected account.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In atproto, account identity is anchored in the account DID, which is the permanent, globally unique, publicly resolvable identifier for the account. The DID resolves to a DID document which indicates the current PDS host location for the account. That PDS (combined with an optional entryway) is the authorization authority for the account and is the OAuth Authorization Server for that account. When speaking to any Authorization Server, it is critical (mandatory) for clients to confirm that it is actually the authoritative server for the account in question, which means independently resolving the account identity (by DID) and confirming that the Authorization Server matches. It is also critical (mandatory) to confirm at the end of an authorization flow that the Authorization Server actually granted tokens for the expected account.
```

Clients can start an auth flow in one of two ways:

- starting with a public account identifier, provided by the user: handle or DID
- starting with a server hostname, provided by the user: PDS or entryway, mapping to either Resource Server and/or Authorization Server

> Some use cases for starting with a server instead of an account identifier is if the user does not remember their full account handle, or only knows their account email.  Another is authentication when a user’s handle is broken. They still need to know their hosting provider in these situation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One use case for starting with a server instead of an account identifier is when the user does not remember their full account handle or only knows their account email.  Another is for authentication when a user’s handle is broken. The user will still need to know their hosting provider in these situation.
```

> When starting with an account identifier, the client must resolve the atproto identity to a DID document. If starting with a handle, it is critical (mandatory) to bi-bidirectionally verify the handle, by checking that the DID document claims the handle (see atproto Handle specification). All handle resolution techniques must be supported, and all atproto-blessed DID methods must be supported, to ensure interoperability with all accounts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When starting with an account identifier, the client must resolve the atproto identity to a DID document. If starting with a handle, it is critical (mandatory) to bidirectionally verify the handle by checking that the DID document claims the handle (see atproto Handle specification). All handle resolution techniques and all atproto-blessed DID methods must be supported to ensure interoperability with all accounts.
```

Reviewer 3: I assume this shouldn't be `bi-bidirectionally` but do verify.

> In some client environments, it may be difficult to resolve all identity types. For example, handle resolution may involve DNS TXT queries, which are not directly supported from browser apps. Client implementations might use alternative techniques (such as DNS-over-HTTP), or could make use of a supporting web service to resolve identities.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In some client environments, it may be difficult to resolve all identity types. For example, handle resolution may involve DNS TXT queries, which are not directly supported from browser apps. Client implementations might use alternative techniques (such as DNS-over-HTTP) or could make use of a supporting web service to resolve identities.
```

Because authorization flows are security-critical, any caching of identity resolution should chose cache lifetimes carefully. Cache lifetimes of less than 10 minutes are recommended for auth flows specifically.

TODO: bluesky implementation doesn't actually differentiate cache lifetimes by use-case in our systems/apps yet

> The resolved DID should be bound to the overall auth session, and should be used as the primary account identifier within client app code. Handles (when verified) are acceptable to display in user interfaces, but may change over time and need to be re-verified periodically. When passing an account identifier through to the Authorization Server as part of the Authorization Request in the `login_field`, it is recommended to use the exact account identifier supplied by the user (handle or DID), to ensure any sign-in flow is consistent (users might not recognize their own account DID).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The resolved DID should be bound to the overall auth session and should be used as the primary account identifier within client app code. Handles (when verified) are acceptable to display in user interfaces, but may change over time and need to be re-verified periodically. When passing an account identifier through to the Authorization Server as part of the Authorization Request in the `login_field`, it is recommended to use the exact account identifier supplied by the user (handle or DID) to ensure any sign-in flow is consistent (users might not recognize their own account DID).
```

At the end of the auth flow, when the client does an initial token fetch, the Authorization Server must return the account DID in the `sub` field of the JSON response body. If the entire auth flow started with an account identifier, it is critical for the client to verify that this DID matches the expected DID bound to the session earlier; the linkage from account to Authorization Server will already have been verified in this situation.

> If the auth flow instead starts with a server (hostname or URL), the client will first attempt to fetch Resource Server metadata (and resolve to Authorization Server if found), and then attempt to fetch Authorization Server metadata. See “Authorization Server” section for server metadata fetching. If either is successful, the client will end up with an identified Authorization Server. The Authorization Request and flow will proceed, without a `login_hint` or account identifier being bound to the session, but the Authorization Server `issuer` will be bound to the session.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the auth flow instead starts with a server (hostname or URL), the client will first attempt to fetch Resource Server metadata (and resolve to Authorization Server if found) and then attempt to fetch Authorization Server metadata. See “Authorization Server” section for server metadata fetching. If either is successful, the client will end up with an identified Authorization Server. The Authorization Request and flow will proceed without a `login_hint` or account identifier being bound to the session, but the Authorization Server `issuer` will be bound to the session.
```

> After the auth flow continues and an initial token request succeeds, the client will parse the account identifier from the `sub` field in the token response. At this point, the client can still not trust that it has actually authenticated the indicated account. It is critical for the client to resolve the identity (DID document), extract the declared PDS host, and confirm that the PDS (Resource Server) is resolves to the the Authorization Server bound to the session, by fetching the Resource Server metadata.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the auth flow continues and an initial token request succeeds, the client will parse the account identifier from the `sub` field in the token response. At this point, the client still cannot trust that it has actually authenticated the indicated account. It is critical for the client to resolve the identity (DID document), extract the declared PDS host, and confirm that the PDS (Resource Server) resolves to the the Authorization Server bound to the session by fetching the Resource Server metadata.
```

> To re-iterate, it is critical for all clients - including those only interested in atproto Identity Authentication - to go through to the entire Authorization flow, and to verify that the account identifier (DID) in the `sub` field of the token response is consistent with the Authorization Server hostname/origin (`issuer`).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To reiterate, it is critical for all clients - including those only interested in atproto Identity Authentication - to go through the entire Authorization flow and to verify that the account identifier (DID) in the `sub` field of the token response is consistent with the Authorization Server hostname/origin (`issuer`).
```

### Authorization Scopes

OAuth scopes allow more granular control over the resources and actions a client is granted access to.

The special `atproto` scope is required for all atproto OAuth sessions. The semantics are somewhat similar to the `openid` scope: inclusion of it confirms that the client is using the atproto profile of OAuth and will comply with all the requirements laid out in this specification. No access to any atproto-specific PDS resources will be granted without this scope included.

Authorization Servers may support other profiles of OAuth if client does not include the `atproto` scope. For example, an Authorization Server might function as both an atproto PDS/entryway, and support other protocols/standards at the same time.

> Use of the atproto OAuth profile, as indicated by the `atproto` scope, means that the Authorization Server will return the atproto account DID as an account identifier in the `sub` field of token requests. A client may include only the `atproto` scope if they only need account authentication, for example a “Login with atproto” use case. Unlike OpenID, profile metadata in atproto is generally public, so an additional authorization scope for fetching profile metadata is not needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use of the atproto OAuth profile, as indicated by the `atproto` scope, means that the Authorization Server will return the atproto account DID as an account identifier in the `sub` field of token requests. A client may include only the `atproto` scope if they only need account authentication - for example a “Login with atproto” use case. Unlike OpenID, profile metadata in atproto is generally public, so an additional authorization scope for fetching profile metadata is not needed.
```

In OAuth 2.0, Authorization Servers may always return the granted scopes in auth request responses and token responses, but are only required to do so if the scope is different from what the client requested. In the atproto OAuth profile, servers must always return the granted scopes.

TODO: bluesky PDS/entryway doesn't always return scopes yet

> The intention is to support a flexible scopes based on Lexicon namespaces (NSIDs) so that clients can be given access only to the specific content and API endpoints they need access to. Until the design of that scope system is ready, the atproto profile of OAuth defines two transitional scopes, which align with the permissions granted under the original “session token” auth system:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The intention is to support flexible scopes based on Lexicon namespaces (NSIDs) so that clients can be given access only to the specific content and API endpoints they need access to. Until the design of that scope system is ready, the atproto profile of OAuth defines two transitional scopes which align with the permissions granted under the original “session token” auth system:
```

    - ability to generate service auth tokens for the specific API endpoints the client has access to
    - no account management actions: change handle, change email, delete or deactivate account, migrate account
    - no access to DMs (the `chat.bsky.*` Lexicons), specifically
- `transition:chat.bsky`: equivalent to adding the “DM Access” toggle for “App Passwords”
    - API endpoints and service proxying for the `chat.bsky` Lexicons specifically
    - ability to generate service auth tokens for the `chat.bsky` Lexicons
    - this scope depends on and does not function without the  `transition:generic` scope

### Authorization Requests

This section details standards and requirements specific to Authorization Requests.

PKCE and PAR are required for all clients types and Authorization Servers. Confidential clients authenticate themselves using JWT client assertions.

#### Request Fields

A summary of fields relevant to authorization requests with the atproto OAuth profile:

- `client_id` (string, required): identifies the client software. See "Client" section below for details

> - `response_type` (string, required): must contain be `code`

Author: re-wrote, thanks

- `code_challenge` (string, required): the PKCE challenge value. See PKCE section.
- `code_challenge_method` (string, required): which code challenge method is used, for example `S256`. See PKCE section.

> - `state` (string, required): random token used to verify the authorization request against the response. See details below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `state` (string, required): random token used to verify the authorization request against the response. See below.
```

> - `redirect_uri` (string, required): must match against URIs declared in client metadata, and have a format consistent with the `application_type` declared in the client metadata. See below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `redirect_uri` (string, required): must match against URIs declared in client metadata and have a format consistent with the `application_type` declared in the client metadata. See below.
```

For web clients, the `redirect_uri` is a HTTPS URL which will be redirected in the browser to return users to the application at the end of the Authorization flow. The `redirect_uri` must match one one of the URIs declared in the client metadata, and the Authorization Server must verify this condition. There is a special exception for the [localhost](http://localhost) development workflow to use `http://`, as described in a separate section. For native clients, the `redirect_uri` may use a custom URI scheme to have the operating system redirect the user back to the app, instead of a web browser. The custom scheme must match the `client_id` hostname in reverse-domain order. The URI scheme must be followed by a single colon (`:`) then a single forward slash (`/`) then a URI path component. For example, an app with `client_id`  [`https://app.example.com/client-metadata.json`](https://app.example.com/client-metadata.json) could have a `redirect_uri` of `com.example.app:/callback`.

> Clients may include additional optional authorization request parameters, and servers may process them, but are not required to. Refer to other OAuth standards and the [IANA OAuth parameter registry](https://www.iana.org/assignments/oauth-parameters/oauth-parameters.xhtml).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Clients may include additional optional authorization request parameters - and servers may process them - but they are not required to. Refer to other OAuth standards and the [IANA OAuth parameter registry](https://www.iana.org/assignments/oauth-parameters/oauth-parameters.xhtml).
```

#### Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE)

PKCE is mandatory for all Authorization Requests. Clients must generate new unique random challenges for every authorization request.

The `S256` challenge method must be supported by all clients and Authorization Servers; see [RFC 7636](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7636) for details. The `plain` method is not allowed. Additional methods may in theory be supported if both client and server support them.

#### Pushed Authorization Requests (PAR)

> Authorization Servers must support PAR, and clients of all types must use PAR for Authorization Requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Authorization Servers must support PAR and clients of all types must use PAR for Authorization Requests.
```

> Authorization Servers must set `require_pushed_authorization_requests` to `true` in their server metadata document, and include a valid URL in `pushed_authorization_request_endpoint`. See [RFC 9207](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9207) for requirements on this URL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Authorization Servers must set `require_pushed_authorization_requests` to `true` in their server metadata document and include a valid URL in `pushed_authorization_request_endpoint`. See [RFC 9207](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9207) for requirements on this URL.
```

> Clients make an HTTPS POST request to the `pushed_authorization_request_endpoint` URL, with the request parameters in the form-encoded request body. They receive a `request_uri` (not to be confused with `redirect_uri`) in the JSON response object. When they redirect the user to the authorization endpoint (`authorization_endpoint`), they omit most of the request parameters they already sent, and include this `redirect_uri` along with `client_id` as query parameters instead.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Clients make an HTTPS POST request to the `pushed_authorization_request_endpoint` URL, with the request parameters in the form-encoded request body. They receive a `request_uri` (not to be confused with `redirect_uri`) in the JSON response object. When they redirect the user to the authorization endpoint (`authorization_endpoint`), they omit most of the request parameters they already sent and include this `redirect_uri` along with `client_id` as query parameters instead.
```

> DISCLAIMER: PAR is a relatively new and less-supported standard, and the requirement to use PAR may be relaxed if it found to be too onerous a requirement for client implementations. In that case, Authorization Servers would be required to support both PAR and non-PAR requests, and PAR would be optional for clients.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
DISCLAIMER: PAR is a relatively new and less-supported standard, and the requirement to use PAR may be relaxed if it is found to be too onerous a requirement for client implementations. In that case, Authorization Servers would be required to support both PAR and non-PAR requests with PAR being optional for clients.
```

#### Confidential Client Authentication

> Confidential clients authenticate themselves during the Authorization Request using a JWT client assertion. Authorization Servers may grand confidential clients longer token/session lifetimes. See "Tokens" section for more context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Confidential clients authenticate themselves during the Authorization Request using a JWT client assertion. Authorization Servers may grant confidential clients longer token/session lifetimes. See "Tokens" section for more context.
```

- confidential clients are expected to immediately remove client authentication keys from their client metadata if they key has been leaked or compromised
- Authorization Servers must bind active auth sessions for confidential clients to the client authentication key used at the start of the session. The server should revoke the session and reject further token refreshes if the client authentication key becomes absent from the client metadata. This means the Authorization Server is expected to periodically re-fetch client metadata.

TODO: what if the auth server fails to fetch the client metadata at all? eg a transient TCP connection failure, or server is just down for a couple hours. seems a bit brittle to immediately revoke, maybe a grace period?

### Tokens and Session Lifetime

Access tokens are used to authorize client requests to the account's PDS (”Resource Server”). From the standpoint of the client, they are opaque, but they are often signed JWTs including an expiration time. Depending on the PDS implementation, it may or may not be possible to revoke individual access tokens in the event of a compromise, so they must be restricted relatively short lifetime.

> Refresh tokens are used to request new tokens (of both types) from the Authorization Server (PDS or entryway). They are also opaque from the standpoint of clients. Auth sessions can be revoked, invalidating the refresh tokens, so they may have longer lifetime. In the atproto OAuth profile, refresh tokens are generally single-use, with the "new" refresh token replacing that used in the token request. This means client implementations may need locking primitives to prevent concurrent token refresh requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Refresh tokens are used to request new tokens (of both types) from the Authorization Server (PDS or entryway). They are also opaque from the standpoint of clients. Auth sessions can be revoked - invalidating the refresh tokens - so they may have longer lifetime. In the atproto OAuth profile, refresh tokens are generally single-use, with the "new" refresh token replacing that used in the token request. This means client implementations may need locking primitives to prevent concurrent token refresh requests.
```

To request refresh tokens, the client must declare `refresh_token` as a grant type in their client metadata.

Tokens are always bound to a unique session DPoP key. Tokens must not be shared or reused across client devices. They must also be uniquely bound to the client software (`client_id`). The overall session ends when the access and refresh tokens can no longer be used.

> The specific lifetime of sessions, access tokens, and refresh tokens are up to the Authorization Server implementation and may depend security assessments of client type and reputation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The specific lifetime of sessions, access tokens, and refresh tokens is up to the Authorization Server implementation and may depend on security assessments of client type and reputation.
```

Some guidelines and requirements:

- access token lifetimes should be less than 30 minutes in all situations. If the server can not revoke individual access tokens, the maximum is 15 minutes, and 5 minutes is recommended.
- for “untrusted” public clients, overall session lifetime should be limited to 7 days, and the lifetime of individual refresh tokens should be limited to 24 hours
- for confidential clients, the overall session lifetime may be unlimited. Individual refresh tokens should have a lifetime limited to 180 days
- confidential clients must use the same client authentication key and assertion method for refresh token requests that they did for the initial authentication request

### Demonstrating Proof of Possession (DPoP)

The atproto OAuth profile mandates use of DPoP for all client types when making auth token requests (to the Authorization Server), and when making authorized requests to the resource server. See [RFC 9449](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9449) for details.

Clients must initiate DPoP in the initial authorization request (PAR).

TODO: bluesky PDS implementation and example code doesn’t reflect this new requirement yet

> Server-provided DPoP nonces are mandatory. The Resource Server and Authorization server may shared nonces (especially if they are the same server), or have separate nonces. Clients should track the DPoP nonce per account session and per server. Servers must rotate nonces periodically, with a maximum lifetime of 5 minutes. Servers may use the same nonce across all client sessions and across multiple requests at any point in time. Servers should accept recently-stale (old) nonces to make rotation smoother for clients with multiple concurrent request in-flight. Clients should be resilient to unexpected nonce updates in the form of HTTP 400 errors, and retry their requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Server-provided DPoP nonces are mandatory. The Resource Server and Authorization server may shared nonces (especially if they are the same server), or have separate nonces. Clients should track the DPoP nonce per account session and per server. Servers must rotate nonces periodically, with a maximum lifetime of 5 minutes. Servers may use the same nonce across all client sessions and across multiple requests at any point in time. Servers should accept recently-stale (old) nonces to make rotation smoother for clients with multiple concurrent request in-flight. Clients should be resilient to unexpected nonce updates in the form of HTTP 400 errors and should retry those failed requests.
```

Reviewer 3: Verify that sounds right.

At this point it is critical (mandatory) for all clients to verify that the account identified by the `sub` field is consistent with the Authorization Server `issuer`, either by validating against the originally-supplied account DID, or by resolving the accounts DID to confirm the PDS is consistent with the Authorization Server. See “Identity Authentication” section.

TODO: how does the client know what scopes it got approved for? should we require that scope info gets passed back in the token response?

Authentication-only clients can end the flow here.

Using the access token, clients are now able to make authorized requests to the PDS (”Resource Server”). They must use DPoP for all such requests, along with the access token. Tokens (both access and refresh) will need to be periodically “refreshed” by subsequent request to the Authorization Server token endpoint. These also require DPoP. See “Tokens and Session Lifetime” section for details.

TODO: users should be able to revoke session from the PDS web interface

### OAuth Security Considerations

> There are a number of situations where HTTP URLs provided by external parties are fetched by both clients and providers (servers). Care must be taken to prevent harmful fetches due to maliciously crafted URLs, including hostnames which resolve to private or internal IP addresses. The general term for this class of security issue is SSRF. There is also a class of denial-of-service attacks involving HTTP requests to malicious servers, such as huge response bodies, TCP-level slow-loris attacks, etc. We strongly recommend using "hardened" HTTP client implementations/configurations to mitigate these attacks.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
There are a number of situations where HTTP URLs provided by external parties are fetched by both clients and providers (servers). Care must be taken to prevent harmful fetches due to maliciously crafted URLs, including hostnames which resolve to private or internal IP addresses. The general term for this class of security issue is Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF). There is also a class of denial-of-service attacks involving HTTP requests to malicious servers, such as huge response bodies, TCP-level slow-loris attacks, etc. We strongly recommend using "hardened" HTTP client implementations/configurations to mitigate these attacks.
```
Also: might be helpful to spell out what SSRF means here

Unlike a centralized app platform, in atproto there are many independent server implementations, so server discovery and client registration are automated using a combination of public auth server metadata and public client metadata. The `client_id` is a fully-qualified web URL pointing to the public client metadata (JSON document). There is no `client_secret` shared between servers and clients. When initiating a login with a handle or DID, an atproto-specific identity resolution step is required to discover the account’s PDS network location.

In OAuth terminology, an atproto Personal Data Server (PDS) is a "Resource Server" to which authorized HTTP requests are made using access tokens. Sometimes the PDS is also the "Authorization Server" - which services OAuth authorization flows and token requests - while in other situations a separate "entryway" service acts as the Authorization Server for multiple PDS instances. Clients from a metadata file from the PDS to discover the Authorization Server network location.

> DPoP (with mandatory nonces) is required to bind auth tokens to specific client software instances (eg, end devices or browser sessions). Pushed Authentication Requests (PAR) are used to streamline the authorization request flow. “Confidential” clients use JWTs signed with a secret key to authenticate the client software to Authorization Servers when making authorization requests.

Reviewer 2: - Devs seem to struggle the most with DPoP. Would this wording help them, even a bit ?

```suggestion
DPoP (with mandatory server issued nonces) is required to bind auth tokens to specific client software instances (eg, end devices or browser sessions). Pushed Authentication Requests (PAR) are used to streamline the authorization request flow. “Confidential” clients use JWTs signed with a secret key to authenticate the client software to Authorization Servers when making authorization requests.
```

- Also: this is the first time we talk about DPoP. Should we add an href to the RFC, to give the reader context about what that thing is ? (and as was done when PKCE was introduced). Same for "PAR"

The environment a client runs in also impacts the type of redirect (callback) URLs it uses during the Authorization Flow:

- **web clients** include web services and browser apps. Redirect URLs are regular web URLs which open in a browser.
- **native clients** include some mobile and desktop native clients. Redirect URLs may use platform-specific app callback schemes to open in the app itself.

Authorization Servers may maintain a set of "trusted" clients, identified by `client_id`. Because any client could use unverified client metadata to impersonate a better-known app or brand, Authorization Servers should not display such metadata to end users in the Authorization Interface by default. Trusted clients can have additional metadata shown, such as a readable name (`client_name`), project URI (`client_uri`, which may have a different domain/origin than `client_id`) and logo (`logo_uri`). See the "Security Considerations" section for more details.

> Clients which are only using atproto OAuth for account authentication (without authorization to access PDS resources) should request minimal scopes (see “Scopes” section), but still need to implement most of the authorization flow. In particular, it is critical that they check the `sub` field in a token response to verify the account identity (this is an atproto-specific detail).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clients which are only using atproto OAuth for account authentication (without authorization to access PDS resources) should request minimal scopes (see “Scopes” section), but still need to implement most of the authorization flow. In particular, it is critical that they check the `sub` and `issuer` fields in a token response to verify the account identity (this is an atproto-specific detail).
```

> Clients which are only using atproto OAuth for account authentication (without authorization to access PDS resources) should request minimal scopes (see “Scopes” section), but still need to implement most of the authorization flow. In particular, it is critical that they check the `sub` field in a token response to verify the account identity (this is an atproto-specific detail).

Reviewer 2: Not sure how to phrase this, and i know that this is also specified later in this document, but this is an important security measure so I think that for devs skimming through the doc while implementing, it is important to repeat this.

```suggestion
Clients which are only using atproto OAuth for account authentication (without authorization to access PDS resources) should request minimal scopes (see “Scopes” section), but still need to implement most of the authorization flow. In particular, it is critical that they check the `sub` field in a token response to verify the account identity (this is an atproto-specific detail). Clients must also ensure that the `iss` callback query parameter matches the Authorization Server's (derived from the `sub`) `issuer` metadata.
```

Author: tracking: https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto-website/issues/339

:::

Clients must publish a "client metadata" JSON file on the public web. This will be fetched dynamically by Authorization Servers as part of the authorization request (PAR) and at other times during the session lifecycle. The response HTTP status must be 200 (not another 2xx or a redirect), with a JSON object body with the correct `Content-Type` (`application/json`).

Authorization Servers need to fetch client metadata documents from the public web. They should use a hardened HTTP client for these requests (see "OAuth Security Considerations"). Servers may cache client metadata responses, optionally respecting HTTP caching headers (within limits). Minimum and maximum cache TTLs are not currently specified, but should be chosen to ensure that auth token requests predicated on stale confidential client authentication keys (`jwks` or `jwks_uris`) are rejected in a timely manner.

The following fields are relevant for all client types:

- `client_id` (string, required): the `client_id`. Must exactly match the full URL used to fetch the client metadata file itself

> - `application_type` (string, optional): must be one of `web` or `native`, with `web` as the default if not specified. Note that this is field specified by OpenID/OIDC, which we are borrowing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `application_type` (string, optional): must be one of `web` or `native`, with `web` as the default if not specified. Note that this is field specified by OpenID/OIDC, which we are borrowing. The application type allows Authorization Servers to properly enforce the relevant "best current practices".
```

Author: updated text

- `grant_types` (array of strings, required): `authorization_code` must always be included. `refresh_token` is optional, but must be included if the client will make token refresh requests.
- `scope` (string, sub-strings space-separated, required): all scope values which *might* be requested by this client are declared here. The `atproto` scope is required, so must be included here. See “Scopes” section.

> - `response_types` (array of strings, required): `code` must be included. `implicit` is not allowed.

Reviewer 2: I think that `implicit` could be allowed in the client metadata, but not as `response_type` request parameter during OAuth flow.

- `token_endpoint_auth_method` (string, optional): confidential clients must set this to  `private_key_jwt`.
- `token_endpoint_auth_signing_alg` (string, optional): `none` is never allowed here. The current recommended and most-supported algorithm is `ES256`, but this may evolve over time. Authorization Servers will compare this against their supported algorithms.
- `dpop_bound_access_tokens` (boolean, required): DPoP is mandatory for all clients, so this must be present and `true`
- `jwks` (object with array of JWKs, optional): confidential clients must supply at least one public key in JWK format for use with JWT client authentication. Either this field or the `jwks_uri` field must be provided for confidential clients, but not both.
- `jwks_uri` (string, optional): URL pointing to a JWKS JSON object. See `jwks` above for details.

These fields are optional but recommended:

- `client_name` (string, optional): human-readable name of the client
- `client_uri` (string, optional): not to be confused with `client_id`, this is a homepage URL for the client. If provided, the `client_uri` must have the same hostname as `client_id`.

> - `logo_uri` (string, optional): URL to client logo. HTTPS is required over HTTP.
> - `tos_uri` (string, optional): URL to human-readable terms of service (ToS) for the client. HTTPS is required over HTTP.
> - `policy_uri` (string, optional): URL to human-readable privacy policy for the client. HTTPS is required over HTTP.

Reviewer 2: This explicitly forbids `data:` URIs:

```suggestion
- `logo_uri` (string, optional): URL to client logo. Only `https:` URIs are allowed.
- `tos_uri` (string, optional): URL to human-readable terms of service (ToS) for the client. Only `https:` URIs are allowed.
- `policy_uri` (string, optional): URL to human-readable privacy policy for the client. Only `https:` URIs are allowed.
```

See "OAuth Security Considerations" below for when `client_name`, `client_uri`, and `logo_uri` will or will not be displayed to end users.

Additional optional client metadata fields are enumerated with [IANA](https://www.iana.org/assignments/oauth-parameters/oauth-parameters.xhtml#client-metadata). Note that these are shared with the "Dynamic Client Registration" standard, which is not used directly by the atproto OAuth profile.

#### Localhost Client Development

> When working on client software, it may be difficult for developers to publish in-progress client metadata at a public URL so that authorization servers can access it. This may even be true for development environments using a containerized Authorization Server and local DNS, because of SSRF protections against local IP ranges.

Reviewer 2: Not only SSRF protection but also: a server cannot contact another computer's localhost!

```suggestion
When working on client software, it may be difficult for developers to publish in-progress client metadata at a public URL so that authorization servers can access it. This may even be true for development environments using a containerized Authorization Server and local DNS, because there is no way an Authorization Server can interact with a client's loopback interface.
```

Author: The specific situation this is describing is where a developer is running the entire atproto stack locally, including the Authorization Server, in docker containers. instead of developing against the live network. in that situation the AS could make localhost connections.

Reviewer 2: There is also the scenario of a client dev working against a prod deployment, which is likely the most common case, don't you think ?

Author: updated text

To make development workflows easier, a special exception is made for clients with `client_id` having origin `http://localhost` (with no port number specified). Authorization Servers are encouraged to support this exception - including in production environments - but it is optional.

> In a localhost `client_id` scenario, the Authorization Server should verify that the scheme is `http`, and that the hostname is exactly `localhost` with no port specified. IP addresses (`127.0.0.1`, etc) are not supported. The path parameter must be empty (`/`).

Reviewer 2: This is "important" for backwards compatibility (if we care about this)

> In a localhost `client_id` scenario, the Authorization Server should verify that the scheme is `http`, and that the hostname is exactly `localhost` with no port specified. IP addresses (`127.0.0.1`, etc) are not supported. The path parameter must be empty (`/`).

Reviewer 2: Actually, let's keep it like it is.

> In the Authorization Request, the `redirect_uri` must match one of those supplied (or a default). Path components must match, but port numbers are not matched.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the Authorization Request, the `redirect_uri` must match one of those supplied (or a default). Path components must match, but port numbers are not matched.
```

From [OAuth2.1](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1-10#authorization-request)
> "redirect_uri": OPTIONAL if only one redirect URI is registered for this client. REQUIRED if multiple redirict URIs are registered for this client. See [Section 2.3.2](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1-10#multiple-redirect-uris).

Author: This entire section is about the loopback address case; re-iterating that this applies only for loopback addresses feels redundant?

Some metadata fields can be configured via query parameter in the `client_id` URL (with appropriate urlencoding):

- `redirect_uri` (string, multiple query parameters allowed, optional): allows declaring a local redirect/callback URL, with path component matched but port numbers ignored. The default values (if none are supplied) are `http://127.0.0.1/` and `http://[::1]/`.
- `scope` (string with space-separated values, single query parameter allowed, optional): the set of scopes which might be requested by the client. Default is `atproto`.

The other parameters in the virtual client metadata document will be:

- `client_id` (string): the exact `client_id` (URL) used to generate the virtual document

> - `client_name` (string): a value chosen by the Authorization Server (e.g. "Loopback client")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `client_name` (string): a value chosen by the Authorization Server (e.g. "Development client")
```

Author: updated text

At the end of the auth flow, when the client does an initial token fetch, the Authorization Server must return the account DID in the `sub` field of the JSON response body. If the entire auth flow started with an account identifier, it is critical for the client to verify that this DID matches the expected DID bound to the session earlier; the linkage from account to Authorization Server will already have been verified in this situation.

If the auth flow instead starts with a server (hostname or URL), the client will first attempt to fetch Resource Server metadata (and resolve to Authorization Server if found) and then attempt to fetch Authorization Server metadata. See “Authorization Server” section for server metadata fetching. If either is successful, the client will end up with an identified Authorization Server. The Authorization Request flow will proceed without a `login_hint` or account identifier being bound to the session, but the Authorization Server `issuer` will be bound to the session.

> After the auth flow continues and an initial token request succeeds, the client will parse the account identifier from the `sub` field in the token response. At this point, the client still cannot trust that it has actually authenticated the indicated account. It is critical for the client to resolve the identity (DID document), extract the declared PDS host, confirm that the PDS (Resource Server) resolves to the Authorization Server bound to the session by fetching the Resource Server metadata, and fetch the Authorization Server metadata to confirm that the `issuer` field matches the Authorization Server origin (see [`draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1` section 7.3.1](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1-11#section-7.13.1) regarding this last point).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the auth flow continues and an initial token request succeeds, the client will parse the account identifier from the `sub` field in the token response. At this point, the client still cannot trust that it has actually authenticated the indicated account. It is critical for the client to resolve the identity (DID document), extract the declared PDS host, confirm that the PDS (Resource Server) resolves to the Authorization Server bound to the session by fetching the Resource Server metadata, and fetch the Authorization Server metadata to confirm that the `issuer` field matches the Authorization Server origin (see [`draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1` section 7.3.1](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1-11#section-7.13.1) regarding this last point). Additionaly, the client must verify that the whole flow was initiated with that same issuer. This is typically done through the use of the `state` parameter. Note that it is critical that the `state` parameter cannot be forged by an untrusted party.
```

Author: I added some of the motivation/discussion of the `state` parameter to the auth request section.

Authorization Servers may support other profiles of OAuth if client does not include the `atproto` scope. For example, an Authorization Server might function as both an atproto PDS/entryway, and support other protocols/standards at the same time.

Use of the atproto OAuth profile, as indicated by the `atproto` scope, means that the Authorization Server will return the atproto account DID as an account identifier in the `sub` field of token requests. Authorization Servers must return `atproto` in `scopes_supported` in their metadata document, so that clients know they support the atproto OAuth profile. A client may include only the `atproto` scope if they only need account authentication - for example a “Login with atproto” use case. Unlike OpenID, profile metadata in atproto is generally public, so an additional authorization scope for fetching profile metadata is not needed.

> In OAuth 2.0, Authorization Servers may return the granted scopes in any auth request response and any token responses, but are only required to do so if the scope is different from what the client requested. In the atproto OAuth profile, servers must always return the granted scopes. Clients should reject token responses if they don't contain a `scope` field, or if the `scope` field does not contain `atproto`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The OAuth 2.0 specification does not require Authorization Servers to return the granted scopes in the token responses unless the scope that was granted is different from what the client requested. In the atproto OAuth profile, servers must always return the granted scopes in the token response. Clients should reject token responses if they don't contain a `scope` field, or if the `scope` field does not contain `atproto`.
```

There is a special exception for the localhost development workflow to use `http://127.0.0.1` or `http://[::1]` URLs, with matching rules described in the "Localhost Client Development" section. These clients use web URLs, but have `application_type` set to `native` in the generated client metadata.

For native clients, the `redirect_uri` may use a custom URI scheme to have the operating system redirect the user back to the app, instead of a web browser. The custom scheme must match the `client_id` hostname in reverse-domain order. The URI scheme must be followed by a single colon (`:`) then a single forward slash (`/`) and then a URI path component. For example, an app with `client_id`  [`https://app.example.com/client-metadata.json`](https://app.example.com/client-metadata.json) could have a `redirect_uri` of `com.example.app:/callback`.

Clients may include additional optional authorization request parameters - and servers may process them - but they are not required to. Refer to other OAuth standards and the [IANA OAuth parameter registry](https://www.iana.org/assignments/oauth-parameters/oauth-parameters.xhtml).

#### Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE)

> PKCE is mandatory for all Authorization Requests. Clients must generate new, unique, random challenges for every authorization request.

Reviewer 2: No need to enforce uniqueness over long period. But at least for short periods (+- 1 day)

```suggestion
PKCE is mandatory for all Authorization Requests. Clients must generate new, unique, random challenges for every authorization request. Authorization Servers must ensure sufficient measures to prevent `code_challenge` from being re-used.
```

Author: phrased it differently

- confidential clients should periodically rotate client keys, adding new keys to the JWKS set and using then for new sessions, then removing old keys once they are no longer associated with any active auth sessions
- confidential clients must include `token_endpoint_auth_method` as `private_key_jwt` in their client metadata document
- confidential clients are expected to immediately remove client authentication keys from their client metadata if the key has been leaked or compromised
- Authorization Servers must bind active auth sessions for confidential clients to the client authentication key used at the start of the session. The server should revoke the session and reject further token refreshes if the client authentication key becomes absent from the client metadata. This means the Authorization Server is expected to periodically re-fetch client metadata.

### Tokens and Session Lifetime

> Access tokens are used to authorize client requests to the account's PDS (”Resource Server”). From the standpoint of the client they are opaque, but they are often signed JWTs including an expiration time. Depending on the PDS implementation, it may or may not be possible to revoke individual access tokens in the event of a compromise, so they must be restricted to a relatively short lifetime.

Reviewer 2: Nit: double quotes are not consistent across the document

```suggestion
Access tokens are used to authorize client requests to the account's PDS ("Resource Server"). From the standpoint of the client they are opaque, but they are often signed JWTs including an expiration time. Depending on the PDS implementation, it may or may not be possible to revoke individual access tokens in the event of a compromise, so they must be restricted to a relatively short lifetime.
```

Some guidelines and requirements:

- access token lifetimes should be less than 30 minutes in all situations. If the server cannot revoke individual access tokens then the maximum is 15 minutes, and 5 minutes is recommended.
- for “untrusted” public clients, overall session lifetime should be limited to 7 days, and the lifetime of individual refresh tokens should be limited to 24 hours
- for confidential clients, the overall session lifetime may be unlimited. Individual refresh tokens should have a lifetime limited to 180 days
- confidential clients must use the same client authentication key and assertion method for refresh token requests that they did for the initial authentication request

### Demonstrating Proof of Possession (DPoP)

The atproto OAuth profile mandates use of DPoP for all client types when making auth token requests to the Authorization Server and when making authorized requests to the Resource Server. See [RFC 9449](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9449) for details.

Clients must initiate DPoP in the initial authorization request (PAR).

> Server-provided DPoP nonces are mandatory. The Resource Server and Authorization Server may share nonces (especially if they are the same server) or they may have separate nonces. Clients should track the DPoP nonce per account session and per server. Servers must rotate nonces periodically, with a maximum lifetime of 5 minutes. Servers may use the same nonce across all client sessions and across multiple requests at any point in time. Servers should accept recently-stale (old) nonces to make rotation smoother for clients with multiple concurrent request in-flight. Clients should be resilient to unexpected nonce updates in the form of HTTP 400 errors and should retry those failed requests. Clients must reject responses missing a DPoP header, if the request included DPoP.

Reviewer 2: > Clients must reject responses missing a DPoP header, if the request included DPoP.

What do you mean by this ? The DPoP header is a request header, not a response header.

Author: Meaning that if the server fails to return a DPoP nonce (via HTTP header), that would indicate that the server isn't doing DPoP, and the client should reject the session.

Reviewer 2: Should we be a little more specific here ?

```suggestion
Server-provided DPoP nonces are mandatory. The Resource Server and Authorization Server may share nonces (especially if they are the same server) or they may have separate nonces. Clients should track the DPoP nonce per account session and per server. Servers must rotate nonces periodically, with a maximum lifetime of 5 minutes. Servers may use the same nonce across all client sessions and across multiple requests at any point in time. Servers should accept recently-stale (old) nonces to make rotation smoother for clients with multiple concurrent request in-flight. Clients should be resilient to unexpected nonce updates in the form of HTTP 400 errors and should retry those failed requests. Clients must reject responses missing a `DPoP-Nonce` header, if the request included DPoP.
```

Author: added to text

The client starts by asking for the user’s account identifier (handle or DID), or for a PDS/entryway hostname. See “Identity Authentication” section for details.

For an account identifier, the client resolves the identity to a DID document, extracts the declared PDS URL, then fetches the Resource Server and Authorization Server locations. If starting with a server hostname, the client resolves that hostname to an Authorization Server. In either case, Authorization Server metadata is fetched and verified against requirements for atproto OAuth (see “Authorization Server” section).

The client next makes a Pushed Authorization Request via HTTP POST request. See “Authorization Request” section; some notable details include:

- a randomly generated `state` token is required, and will be used to reference this authorization request with the subsequent response callback
- PKCE is required, so a secret value is generated and stored, and a derived challenge is included in the request
- `scope` values are requested here, and must include `atproto`
- for confidential clients, a `client_assertion` is included, with type `jwt-bearer`, signed using the secret client authentication key

> - the client generates a new DPoP key for the user/session and uses it starting with the PAR request

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- the client generates a new DPoP key for the user/device/session and uses it starting with the PAR request
```

- if the auth flow started with an account identifier, the client should pass that starting identifier via the `login_hint` field
- atproto uses PAR, so the request will be sent as an HTTP POST request to the Authorization Server

The Authorization Server will receive the PAR request and use the `client_id` URL to resolve the client metadata document. The server validates the request and client metadata, then stores information about the session, including binding a DPoP key to the session. The server returns a `request_uri` token to the client, including a DPoP nonce via HTTP header.

> The client receives the `request_uri` and prepares to redirect the user. At this point, the client usually needs to persist information about the session to some type of secure storage, so it can be read back after the redirect returns. This might be a database (for a web service backend) or web platform storage like IndexedDB (for a browser app). The client then redirects the user via browser to the Authorization Server’s auth endpoint, including the `request_uri` as a URL parameter.

Reviewer 2: This seems like a good place to remind of:

```suggestion
The client receives the `request_uri` and prepares to redirect the user. At this point, the client usually needs to persist information about the session to some type of secure storage, so it can be read back after the redirect returns. This might be a database (for a web service backend) or web platform storage like IndexedDB (for a browser app). The client then redirects the user via browser to the Authorization Server’s auth endpoint, including the `request_uri` as a URL parameter. In any case, clients must not store session data directly in the `state` request param.
```

> The Authorization Server uses the `request_uri` to look up the earlier Authorization Request parameters, authenticates the user (which might include sign-in or account selection), and prompts the user with the Authorization Interface. The user might refine any granular requested scopes, then approves or rejects the request. The Authorization Server redirects the user back to the `redirect_uri`, which might be a web callback URL (for web clients), or a native app URI.

Reviewer 2: native clients can use app uris, or https uris

```suggestion
The Authorization Server uses the `request_uri` to look up the earlier Authorization Request parameters, authenticates the user (which might include sign-in or account selection), and prompts the user with the Authorization Interface. The user might refine any granular requested scopes, then approves or rejects the request. The Authorization Server redirects the user back to the `redirect_uri`, which might be a web callback URL, or a native app URI (for native clients).
```

> The client uses URL query parameters (`state` and `iss`) to look up and verify session information. Using the `code` query parameter, the client then makes an initial token request to the Authorization Server’s token endpoint. The client completes the PKCE flow by including the earlier value in the `code_verifier` field. Confidential clients need to include a client assertion JWT in the token request; see the "Confidential Client" section. The Authorization Server validates the request and returns a set of tokens, as well as a `sub` field indicating the account identifier (DID) for this session, and the `scope` that is covered by the issued access token.

Reviewer 2: We should explain that replayed the `code` must be rejected by the AS, and must cause the token previously issued to that `code` to be revoked.

Author: The later part does make HTTP glitches/retries brittle during the initial token request, which is too bad. And is it really strictly necessary (mandatory, the sort of thing we will eventually write a compliance test for), or just recommended / best practice?

Reviewer 2: Only `MAY`s and `SHOULD`s in various RFCs (see bellow).

The point of this protection is to ensure that the user realizes it is under attack when it's session gets invalidated. Sadly, there is no way to distinguish an attack from a network error during the token exchange...

When a client fails to exchange a code for a token, it typically *will* implement recovery measures. In case of network error, the recovery method is to initiate a new auth flow, which may be silently accepted by the AS (resulting in no UX degradation). Worst case scenario, the user will have to "accept" again.

https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics#section-4.3.1

> When a browser navigates to client.example/redirection_endpoint?code=abcd as a result of a redirect from a provider's authorization endpoint, the URL including the authorization code may end up in the browser's history. An attacker with access to the device could obtain the code and try to replay it.

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6819.html#section-4.4.1.1

> If an authorization server observes multiple attempts to redeem an authorization "code", the authorization server may want to revoke all tokens granted based on the authorization "code" (see [Section 5.2.1.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6819.html#section-5.2.1.1)).

> The authorization server should enforce a one-time usage restriction (see [Section 5.1.5.4](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6819.html#section-5.1.5.4)).

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6819.html#section-5.1.5.4

> For example, if an authorization server observes more than one attempt to redeem an authorization "code", the authorization server may want to revoke all access tokens granted based on the authorization "code" as well as reject the current request.

https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6819.html#section-5.2.3.6

> An authorization server may revoke a client's secret in order to prevent abuse of a revealed secret.
>
> Note: This measure will immediately invalidate any authorization "code" or refresh token issued to the respective client.

Reviewer 2: The issue is worse with refresh_token rotation, as a new auth flow must be initiated, at a time when the user was not already authenticating.

Author: I updated text to add this as a "should" in the PKCE session (this is about codes).

tracking discussion of whether this is a "must": https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto-website/issues/339

At this point it is critical (mandatory) for all clients to verify that the account identified by the `sub` field is consistent with the Authorization Server "issuer" (present in the `iss` query string), either by validating against the originally-supplied account DID, or by resolving the accounts DID to confirm the PDS is consistent with the Authorization Server. See “Identity Authentication” section. The Authorization always returns the scopes approved for the session in the `scopes` field (even if they are the same as the request, as an atproto OAuth profile requirement), which may reflect partial authorization by the user. Clients must reject the session if the response does not include `atproto` in the returned scopes.

> Authentication-only clients can end the flow here.

Reviewer 2: We should encourage clients to `revoke` credentials they no longer use. This requires that we scpe that AS must implement a `revocation_endpoint` (which is an OIDC feature)

Author: bigger change, tracking here: https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto-website/issues/339

The `state` parameter in client authorization requests is mandatory. Clients should use randomly-generated tokens for this parameter and not have collisions or reuse tokens across any combination of device, account, or session. Authorization Servers should reject duplicate state parameters, but are not currently required to track state values across accounts or sessions.

> For web clients, the `redirect_uri` is a HTTPS URL which will be redirected in the browser to return users to the application at the end of the Authorization flow. The URL may include a port number, but not if it is the default port number. The `redirect_uri` must match one of the URIs declared in the client metadata and the Authorization Server must verify this condition.

Author: updated the text

> There is a special exception for the localhost development workflow to use `http://127.0.0.1` or `http://[::1]` URLs, with matching rules described in the "Localhost Client Development" section. These clients use web URLs, but have `application_type` set to `native` in the generated client metadata.

Reviewer 2: All `native` applications can open a port on the machine's loopback interface. For that reason, every `native` apps (and only `native` apps) should be allowed to use `http://127.0.0.1` or `http://[::1]` URLs.

It so happens that the "localhost development" **is** a native app, which allows it  use `http://127.0.0.1` or `http://[::1]` redirect URIs.

Author: tracking: https://github.com/bluesky-social/atproto-website/issues/339
